URL: https://wa-provider.kaiserpermanente.org/static/pdf/hosting/clinical/criteria/pdf/continuity-care.pdf
TITLE: © 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top
CONTENT:
© 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top 
 
 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan 
 of Washington 
Clinical Review Criteria 
Continuity of Care 
• Continuing care for existing members with providers terminated from the network 
• Continuing care requests from new members with out-of-network providers 
• Inpatient coverage for hospitalized members new to KPWA 
• Inpatient coverage for hospitalized members after disenrollment from KPWA 
 
NOTICE: Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington and Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington Options, Inc. (Kaiser Permanente) 
provide these Clinical Review Criteria for internal use by their members and health care providers. The Clinical Review Criteria only apply to 
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington and Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington Options, Inc. Use of the Clinical Review 
Criteria or any Kaiser Permanente entity name, logo, trade name, trademark, or service mark for marketing or publicity purposes, including on 
any website, or in any press release or promotional material, is strictly prohibited. 
 
Kaiser Permanente Clinical Review Criteria are developed to assist in administering plan benefits. These criteria neither offer medical advice 
nor guarantee coverage. Kaiser Permanente reserves the exclusive right to modify, revoke, suspend or change any or all of these Clinical 
Review Criteria, at Kaiser Permanente's sole discretion, at any time, with or without notice. Member contracts differ in health plan benefits. 
Always consult the patient's Evidence of Coverage or call Kaiser Permanente Member Services at 1-888-901-4636 (TTY 711), Monday 
through Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. to determine coverage for a specific medical service. 
 
Criteria 
 
For Medicare Members 
Service Guideline Policy 
 
Continuing 
care for 
existing 
members with 
providers 
terminated 
from the 
network 
 
CMS 
Manuals 
 
Chapter 4 – Benefits and Beneficiary Protections – 110.1.2 Significant Changes to 
Networks 
… it may be necessary for MAOs to allow care to continue to be furnished on an interim, 
transitional basis, by providers who have been terminated from the network in order to 
adequately address continuity of care needs for affected enrollees. 
 
Please note that CMS considers “enrollees who are patients seen on a regular basis by the 
provider whose contract is terminating” to be “affected enrollees.” An “affected 
enrollee” as an enrollee who is assigned to, currently receiving care from, or has received 
care within the past three months from a provider or facility being terminated. 
 
Please see Kaiser Permanente Non-Medicare criteria below for more detail. 
 
 
Standard 
Memo 
 
Kaiser Permanente submits this standard memo language to CMS to address continuity of 
care when there is a network reduction: 
SPECIALTY CARE 
KFHPWA members in active treatment affected by the network changes will continue to 
receive covered health care services from their current providers who are being removed 
from the Medicare Advantage networks. Additionally, current authorizations to providers 
being removed from the Medicare Advantage networks will be honored. For members in a 
specific course of treatment, continued care will be authorized without interruption until 
such authorization is completed. 
KFHPWA has a transition of care policy that is clinically based, and member concerns will 
be evaluated and addressed individually by KFHPWA’s review services and clinical review 
staff to ensure members continue to receive appropriate care. 
 
PRIMARY CARE 
Members paneled to <<group-providers being eliminated CLINIC/GROUP NAME>> 
primary care providers will be provided access to their provider for up to 60 days following 
a written notice offering the member a selection of new personal physicians from which to 
choose. 

 
© 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top 
 
Any members in active treatment affected by the network changes will continue to receive 
covered health care services from their current providers who are being removed from the 
Medicare Advantage network. Additionally, current authorizations to providers being 
removed from the Medicare Advantage network will be honored. For members in a specific 
course of treatment, continued care will be authorized without interruption until such 
authorization is completed. 
 
 
Continuing 
care requests 
from new 
members with 
out-of-network 
providers 
 
KPWA 
Medical 
Policy 
 
The below criteria is intended to prevent disruption of an already initiated treatment plan. 
For the purpose of this policy, a treatment plan is considered already initiated when the 
member is receiving the service or has already been scheduled to receive that service. 
Similarly, a consultation is considered already initiated when it has been scheduled. When 
a consultation has occurred or is scheduled to occur, for the purpose of considering a 
particular service, that service shall not be considered initiated if it has not yet been 
provided or scheduled at the time that the members new Medicare Advantage policy 
becomes active. 
 
A. Continued coverage for new Medicare Advantage enrollees with a non-network 
provider may be covered of the health plan when all of the following criteria are met: 
1. Has completed a Continuity of Care Coverage Request Form within 90 days of 
enrollment in a Kaiser Permanente plan (only required for new enrollees). 
2. The most recent documentation of care provided by the treating practitioner/clinic 
outlines the need for ongoing care related to an active** course of treatment. 
3. The member is undergoing an active** course of treatment for a chronic or acute 
medical condition with this requested provider. In this circumstance, the member 
may be permitted to receive coverage until the acute phase is resolved or up to 
90 days whichever is shorter. 
4. Discontinuity could cause a recurrence or worsening of the condition under 
treatment and interfere with anticipated outcomes, based on clinical notes and 
KPWA Medical Director’s clinical judgment. 
 
B. Outpatient Prescription Drugs 
Within 90 days of enrollment, members may fill up to a 30-day supply of medication, 
including nonformulary drugs and with waiver of Kaiser Permanente’s step therapy 
and prior authorization requirements. This 30-day supply does not include excluded 
drugs and specialty products and does not override quantity limits that are in the place 
for quality or safety reasons. 
 
**Active course of treatment: a patient is actively seeing a provider and following the 
prescribed or ordered course of treatment as outlined by the provider for a particular 
medical condition. 
 
Refer to the Continuity of Care Coverage Guidelines for more information on transferring 
care for new Kaiser Permanente members. 
 
 
Inpatient 
coverage for 
hospitalized 
members upon 
KPWA 
enrollment OR 
Inpatient 
coverage for 
hospitalized 
members 
during plan 
termination 
 
 
Codes of 
Federal 
Regulations 
 
***Members currently in the hospital when joining KPWA 
See the following links for Codes of Regulations: 
• 42 CFR § 422.318 Special rules for coverage that begins or ends during an 
inpatient hospital stay. 
• 42 CFR § 422.320 Special rules for hospice care. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
© 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top 
 
 
For Non -Medicare Members 
Service Guideline 
 
 
Continuing care for 
existing members 
with providers 
terminated from the 
network 
 
I. This policy applies to current Kaiser Permanente members with Commercial plans (HMO, PPO, 
and POS) as well as Medicare Advantage members receiving ongoing primary care or specialty 
care services. This does not apply to new enrollees to Kaiser. 
• Examples of continuing specialty care services include, but are not limited to: 
o outpatient care; 
o inpatient care; or 
o scheduled non-elective surgeries. 
II. Continued coverage is required when: 
• Termination of the provider contract by the health plan or by the provider 
• Provider remains contracted but whose services are no longer needed for a specific 
item/service or provider ceases to perform a specific item/service 
III. Continuity of care for primary care providers (PCPs) applies to members paneled with the 
terminating PCP or who have received care within the last 6 months (based on claims). The 
duration is for up to 90 calendar days from receipt of the notification of the contract change. 
IV. Ongoing specialty care may be covered for members: 
1. Members who have an open authorization to the terminating provider OR 
2. Members who have received care from the terminating provider within the last 12 months 
(based on claims) when ALL of the following criteria are met: 
• The most recent documentation of care provided by the treating practitioner/clinic must 
be provided and support need for ongoing care. 
• Discontinuity could cause a recurrence or worsening of the condition under treatment 
and interfere with anticipated outcomes based on clinical notes and reviewer’s clinical 
judgment. 
• The member is undergoing continuing care for an active course of treatment** for a 
chronic or acute medical condition with this requested provider (not for a new episode of 
care). In this circumstance, the member will be permitted to receive coverage until the 
need for continuing care is resolved or up to 90 calendar days from receipt of the 
notification of the contract change, whichever is shorter. 
 
**Active course of treatment: a patient is actively seeing a provider and following the prescribed or 
ordered course of treatment as outlined by the provider for a particular medical condition. 
 
 
Continuing care 
requests from new 
members with out-
of-network 
providers 
 
A. Continued coverage for new enrollees with a non-network provider may be covered at the 
discretion of the health plan when all of the following criteria are met: 
1. Has completed a Continuity of Care Coverage Request Form within 90 days of enrollment in 
a Kaiser Permanente plan (only required for new enrollees). 
2. The most recent documentation of care provided by the treating practitioner/clinic must be 
provided and support need for ongoing care. 
3. The member is undergoing an active** course of treatment for a chronic or acute medical 
condition with this requested provider. In this circumstance, the member may be permitted to 
receive coverage until the acute phase is resolved or up to 90 days whichever is shorter. 
4. Discontinuity could cause a recurrence or worsening of the condition under treatment and 
interfere with anticipated outcomes, based on clinical notes and KPWA Medical Director’s 
clinical judgment. 
5. The above indications (1-4) are not applicable to PPO and POS members who may continue 
to see former providers using their out-of-network benefit. 
 
B. As an exception, pregnancy related services: If the member is at 32 weeks or beyond in their 
pregnancy at the time of their enrollment with Kaiser Permanente. In this case, the member will 
be permitted to receive continued coverage with her previously established obstetric provider for 
the remainder of her pregnancy through the postpartum period (six weeks after the delivery date). 
 
C. Outpatient Prescription Drugs 
Within 90 days of enrollment, members may fill up to a 30-day supply of medication, including 
nonformulary drugs and with waiver of Kaiser Permanente’s step therapy and prior authorization 
requirements. This 30-day supply does not include excluded drugs and specialty products and 
does not override quantity limits that are in the place for quality or safety reasons. 
 

 
© 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top 
 
**An active course of treatment is defined as a program of planned services to correct or treat a 
diagnosed condition for a defined number of services or treatment period until care is completed or a 
transfer of care with relevant clinical information required to ensure continuity can be initiated. 
 
The following situations will be directed to an in-network provider: 
1. Scheduled elective procedure following enrollment to a Kaiser Permanente plan 
2. Physical examination 
3. Elective service and procedures 
4. Second opinion evaluations 
5. Home care services 
6. Routine monitoring of a chronic condition 
 
Note: The above criteria do not include routine monitoring for a chronic condition 
 
Refer to the Continuity of Care Coverage Guidelines for more information on transferring care for new 
Kaiser Permanente members 
 
 
Inpatient coverage 
for hospitalized 
members new to 
KPWA 
 
 
This criteria applies to members who are inpatient status at the time of enrollment 
 
Members currently in the hospital when joining KPWA 
1. The hospital stay prior to joining KPWA is the financial responsibility of the prior insurance or 
the patient. 
2. KPWA will cover medically necessary hospital stays starting day of enrollment 
3. At KPWA discretion, patient may be transferred to in-network hospital 
 
 
Inpatient coverage 
for hospitalized 
members after 
disenrollment from 
KPWA 
This criteria applies to members who are inpatient status at the time of disenrollment 
 
Members currently in the hospital when terminating KPWA Coverage 
Continuation of Inpatient Services: Members who are receiving covered services past their health plan 
termination date will no longer be covered. Members will be responsible for all charges incurred. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Background 
 
This policy addresses continuity of care when either a members clinician leaves or the member enters or leaves a 
contractual relationship with Kaiser Permanente Health Plan of Washington (KPWA). KPWA coordinates with 
prior insurers and clinicians to maintain uninterrupted care. The policy outlines when KPWA will honor prior 
authorizations from other health plans. The policy applies to all lines of business—Commercial, Medicare, HMO, 
PPO, POS and self-funded plans—and applies to all services requiring prior authorization under the new KPWA 
plan. 
 
Definitions: 
• Active Course of Treatment: A program of planned services to correct or treat a diagnosed condition for 
a defined number of services or treatment period until care is completed or a transfer of care with relevant 
clinical information required to ensure continuity can be initiated. 
• Continuing Care Patient: 
o A member who is: 
▪ undergoing a course of treatment for a serious and complex condition from the provider or facility; 
undergoing a course of institutional or inpatient care from the provider or facility; 
▪ scheduled to undergo nonelective surgery from the provider, including receipt of postoperative 
care from such provider or facility with respect to such a surgery; 
▪ pregnant and undergoing a course of treatment for the pregnancy from the provider or facility, or 
▪ is or was determined to be terminally ill and is receiving treatment for such illness from such 
provider or facility. 
The following information was used in the development of this document and is provided as background only. It is provided for historical 
purposes and does not necessarily reflect the most current published literature. When significant new articles are published that impact 
treatment option, Kaiser Permanente will review as needed. This information is not to be used as coverage criteria. Please only refer to the 
criteria listed above for coverage determinations. 

 
© 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top 
 
• Serious and Complex Condition: 
o A member that has: 
▪ in the case of an acute illness, a condition that is serious enough to require specialized medical 
treatment to avoid the reasonable possibility of death or permanent harm; or 
▪ in the case of a chronic illness or condition, a condition that is: 
➢ life-threatening, degenerative, potentially disabling, or congenital; and 
➢ requires specialized medical care over a prolonged period of time. 
 
Continuity of Care Examples: 
Examples of qualifying continuity of care scenarios may include, but are not limited to: 
• Pregnancy related services: 
• The member is at 28 weeks or beyond in their pregnancy at the time they are notified of their current 
provider’s change in network status. In this case, the member will be permitted to receive continued coverage 
with their previously established obstetric provider for the remainder of their pregnancy through the 
postpartum period (six weeks after the delivery date). 
o In a course of chemotherapy or radiation therapy, until the course is completed or not to exceed 90 
days from the time they are notified of their current provider’s change in network status 
o Receiving outpatient intravenous therapy for a resolving condition (e.g., antibiotics for infection) until 
the condition is resolved or up to 90 days from the time they are notified of their current provider’s 
change in network status, whichever is shorter. 
o In the process of staged surgical procedure, where the next stage(s) will be completed within 90 days 
from the time they are notified of their current provider’s change in network status when medically 
necessary. 
o Receiving Outpatient or Intensive Outpatient (IOP) treatment for chemical dependency or substance 
use disorders. Transition Care may be approved until the clinical course is completed or for no more 
than 90 days from the time they are notified of their current provider’s change in network status when 
medically necessary. 
o Receiving Acute Residential or Partial Hospital treatment for chemical dependency or substance use 
disorders. Transition Care may be approved until the clinical course is completed for no more than 90 
days from the time they are notified of their current provider’s change in network status when 
medically necessary. 
o Outpatient Mental Health services where time is required to transition to an in-network provider. If 
approved, Transition Care may be approved for no more than 90 days from the time they are notified 
of their current provider’s change in network status. 
o Post-operative period (no more than 90 days). 
o Inpatient hospitalization (no more than 90 days from the time they are notified of their current 
provider’s change in network status). Longer stays for medically stable patients may be transferred to 
a contracted facility. 
o Rehabilitative care, such as physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech therapy, and/or massage 
therapy until the acute condition is resolved or where time is required to transition to an in-network 
provider (no more than 90 days from the time they are notified of their current provider’s change in 
network status). 
o Post-acute non-operative fracture care (no more than 90 days). 
 
Examples of the situations below that do not qualify for continuity of care include, but are not limited to: 
• Physical examinations 
• Elective service and procedures 
• Second opinion evaluations 
• Home care services 
• Routine monitoring of a chronic condition 
• Specialty evaluation/assessment for a new clinical concern 
 
Date 
Created 
Date Reviewed Date Last 
Revised 
12/19/2001 07/6/2010MDCRPC, 05/03/2011MDCRPC, 03/06/2012MDCRPC, 01/08/2013MDCRPC, 
11/05/2013MPC, 09/02/2014MPC, 08/04/2015MPC, 06/07/2016MPC, 04/04/2017MPC, 
02/06/2018MPC, 11/06/2018MPC, 11/05/2019MPC, 11/03/2020MPC, 11/02/2021MPC, 
11/01/2022MPC, 11/07/2023MPC, 12/03/2024MPC, 12/02/2025MPC 
12/02/2025 

 
© 2001 Kaiser Foundation Health Plan of Washington. All Rights Reserved. Back to Top 
 
MPC Medical Policy Committee 
 
Revision 
History 
Description 
08/04/2015 MPC approved to merge policies to speak to continued coverage with a non-network provider. It is 
compliant with NCQA and Medicare regulations for transition of care. 
01/11/2016 Added Medicare link 
02/07/2017 MPC approved to adopt minor changes to criteria to specify Outpatient Mental Health Services & 
approval for no more than 3 visits within 30 days. 
04/04/2017 Added indication to clarify this policy only applies to HMO members receiving outpatient care 
04/07/2020 Added additional language per WAC 284-170-360, regarding continuing primary care for Access 
PPO and POS members when a network provider is termed with no cause. 
01/05/2021 MPC approved the changes related to Pregnancy services to include the member is at 32 weeks or 
beyond in their pregnancy at the time of their enrollment with Kaiser Permanente or at the time their 
provider changes network status. Requires 60-day notice, effective date 06/01/2021. 
02/01/2022 MPC approved updates to the Transition of Care Policy that is specific for members who are new 
enrollees for continuing care with Providers outside of the member’s Kaiser Permanente Health 
Plan Network and as well as guidance on continuing inpatient coverage for terminating Kaiser 
members while currently hospitalized. 
11/11/2022 Updated Criteria to reflect the EOC language effective 01/01/2023. 
10/01/2023 MPC approved changes to clinical criteria in efforts to comply with CMS 2024 Final Rule for 
Medicare and Non-Medicare; Effective 01/01/2024. 
12/2/2025 Combined Transition of Care and Continuity of Care policies for clarity. Extended non -Medicare 
coverage for approved non-network care from 30 to 90 days. Effective 1/1/2026. 
 
Reference: 
Federal: 26 U.S.C.A. § 9818; 29 § USC 1185g; 42 USC 300gg-113* 
State: WAC 284-170-280(f)(i)(J); WAC 284-170-360(7); RCW 48.43.515
